[speaker 0] So let's talk about ethics and risk. [speaker 1] Like, in [speaker 0] the far future or in the near future, what are the risks involved with AI? So [speaker 1] AI and ethics are relatively new topics in the world. There are a lot of works in it now. Even in NAMI, our research [speaker 0] institute, this in [speaker 1] pani recently Nepal ko context ma ethics ai ko state kicha bhane ra chahni amro research fellow Shreeasha Paudel unhone thiyo waha le ek level ma kaam garechha ra publish garechha recently yo unesco ko sangau garechha ra ani tar globally pradejive jima pani tabale health medical main mo taire health ma health care ma karchu health care ma massively yo abaa vanch pradejive jima pani tabale health medical main mo taire health ma health care ma karchu health care ma massively yo abaa vanch pradejive jima pani tabale health medical ma karchu health care ma karchu.

[speaker 1] Health care ma massively use garne sammaavna ma ira, kati use hun thalya chha, tar yasko sammaavna yaardaai khari, aba radiology dekhile ra aro kutama ekdam dhare use hunne sammaavna ekdam dekchha, abaa hamne yo sochla media ma chhaidaich ha na, tespachi audio video, language, aba languageman dekhi liyra, even science, arke ekdam isko interesting paksha jaini, science ko physics, biology ko, fundam bivina kurama vaccine developer ma pani yujune kram ma chhau pane pachhi isko tu level ma society ko bivina kurama cha yujune thali chha ke pachhi arko isako jasto vana naamvanta example ko laagi legal paper padera ata legal contract kasto banno parsa ta legal case kasari ladno parsa.

[speaker 1] Or how a legal contract would be made, how a legal case would have to be fought, the work that is being done is functioning extremely robustly, it has started working 100%, it shouldn't be lost, like at that early stage, this cheese, it started to be understood as a job, or another thing, like surveillance systems or human police, or whether the bank will give a loan or not, that comes in society, so this operation happens, or the government’s question is, how will that AI chain be trained? AI cannot do anything 100%, as it is understood, two are human minds, it makes mistakes, AI cannot do everything 100%, almost in everything, it also makes mistakes, sometimes it’s right.

[speaker 1] Almost all things, she also made mistakes, right? Made mistakes, but how she makes mistakes, right? How it is, like she says the data, this is data-driven, we said this is AI, mostly deep neural networks or machine learning or other models, all data-driven. That’s why in data society, some things are like, for example, Lima, US Mali, easy example, give me, like our black caste, then this in Blackstar, now if any crime happened, who did it? Most likely, if the data is distorted, the model will not indicate the possibility of that, but if we look at the history of other different behaviors, they were privileged or not given, or maybe something didn’t sit, didn’t sit, that didn’t work. How is the data fitted, coming in like that? These biases, all these things…

[speaker 1] Yeah, another trustworthiness becomes, like, trust, as trust, these kinds of people now are used for detecting cancer, made medical, they say cancer, these kinds of people, extremely trust or not, what to do? But still inside, again, interpretability. These kinds of doctors, or you can ask them, this is why it’s multiple. Now AI has shaken up the model, which isn’t very interpretable. There are successful models, those that have come, we are trying these things, and their principles are, now if you don’t involve experts in ethics in this, then all of that, that all, that all comes, but later these principles… Now for Google, one way, Facebook another way, research institutes another way, now UNESCO, UN agencies, and European Union, various countries, they are also starting to take AI strategies and ethics rounds, they use terminology, but mostly it’s trustworthiness, fairness, and another…

[speaker 1] This trustworthiness, fairness, and both of our alarms, meaning alarms, it seems biased. To include diversity, if you promote it, there are ethical issues and a lot of the backward class, or those who don’t have privilege, the data amplifies. Then, based on the data, whether to give a loan or not, now the bank, if it doesn’t give a default, then it’s credit. But now the privileged class will pay, the non-privileged cannot do it, even if there’s data, those who don’t have privilege, they won’t give a large amount. They will enforce it, those who have rations, but another, it won’t be global, it will be local.

[speaker 1] Countries like Amin need to start, it seems like two things, like two children, like Amin, like Alexa, they charge, you charge. If you ask in Nepali, there might be limitations. They can take the potential benefits, tools, access, inclusion, globally, communication, they can do it in an inclusive way. Taking advantage of AI, research also needs to be done on labels, money is coming, but then our reality is that the economy, how does it run, where does the money go? There are big resources here. Then all the sharing can be done. They know it, and they work like that. And then the money is divided while doing this, this is a winner, and that is a problem.

[speaker 1] This winner and that is a Yoda problem, research, what label it is also on. It seems, this was the first, now COVID, what’s the case? Really, in health, there are many things to bring, health is also a priority. In research, it’s like, for countries like ours, which are behind economically globally, then this kind of unit, it has, this, this unit, has a global communication flow, exposure pool, built on ethics, a shadow. Nepal's side, really, input and gave them, in that, that term, winner takes all, meaning terminology, shadow. That chain, how it is made, now AI systems and are being built.

[speaker 1] I think the systems and build, there’s a huge market here. I think, even with economics, we’ve learned, plenty of opportunities, yeah, a lot of AI products, data, we need a lot of data, we need a lot of data. And the extreme manpower, we need. And big companies like Facebook, Google, Amazon, these big companies, the infrastructure is huge. Open AI, like technically, they have so much resources, super computers running, running. Because of that, there's a lot of money, again, it can happen. So, new applications can be made, you know. Many good companies are doing it somewhere, some operation, some corner, some good country. They are thinking about technology, implementing applications, right applications, right technically. Many minds have put into it. So, it’s possible. So, seeing this market is huge, big companies need to find a way to do AI systems, training, last, it’s a very complicated thing. Data, right.

[speaker 1] The way data write application, write target, write task, after they trend, they will do data delivery builder, then data delivery collect. Then he has given resources for that, there are a lot of strategists. Another large scale, they will run experiments, and quickly, they will give them. And again, his penetration, now, as much as you can’t do chat, or do anything like that. They will attack or make, or even Facebook, then they will make it, they want to chat with widgets, or messenger, they will give everything. Every business has Instagram, WhatsApp, and if any company makes it, then they have a thousand potential in the market. That will be the winner takes all dynamics. New, new products, new applications. Existing large companies, they also have it. If everything is new, then they can take it. This is the socio-economic era. This is the global economic world. Now, we need to concentrate. If it is, then it is. This is the economic policy. These products are AI-based products. And in Nepal, I have given another potential to explore.

[speaker 1] In the best products, Nepal Mali sees another potential exploitation of the problem, like in medicine, then the big companies, they need data, data, very important. And here, they are all taking steps.